## Abstract

Several  different  ways  exist  for  approaching  hard optimization problems.  Mathematical  programming techniques,  including  (integer)  linear  programming based methods, and metaheuristic approaches are two highly successful streams for combinatorial problems. These two have been established by different communities more or less in isolation from each other. Only  over  several  years  ago  a  larger  number  of researchers recognized the advantages and huge potentials of building hybrids of mathematical programming  methods  and  metaheuristics.  In  fact, many problems can be practically solved much better by exploiting synergies between these different approaches than by 'pure' traditional algorithms. The crucial issue is how mathematical programming methods  and  metaheuristics  should  be  combined  for achieving  those  benefits.  This  paper  surveys  existing techniques  for  such  combinations  and  provide  some examples of using them for vehicle routing problem.

## Combining heuristics and Exact Algorithms: A Review

Hengameh Fakhravar Old Dominion University Hfakh001@odu.edu optimal solution and prove its optimality for every finite size  instance of a COP within an instance-dependent, finite run-time, or prove that no feasible solution exists. If optimal solutions cannot be computed efficiently in practice, it is usual to trade the guarantee of optimality for efficiency. In other words, the guarantee of finding optimal solutions  is  sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  getting very good solutions in reasonably short time by using approximate algorithms.

Index  Terms matheuristics,  optimization-based  heuristics, VRP, survey,

## INTRODUCTION

Many problems arising in areas such as scheduling and production planning, location and distribution management,  Internet  routing  or  bioinformatics  are combinatorial optimization problems (COPs). COPs are intriguing because they are often easy to state but often very difficult to solve, which is captured by the fact that many of them are NP-hard [1]. This difficulty and, at the  same  time,  their  enormous  practical  importance, have led to a large number of solution techniques for them. The available solution techniques can be classified as being either exact or approximate algorithms. Exact algorithms are guaranteed to find an

Two  solution  method  classes  that  have  significant success  are  integer  programming  (IP)  methods  as  an exact  approach,  and  stochastic  local  search  (SLS) algorithms [2] as an approximate approach. IP methods rely on the characteristic of the decision variables being integers. Some well-known IP methods are branch-andbound, branch-and-cut, branch-and-price, and dynamic programming. Important advantages of exact methods for  IP  are  that  (i)  proven  optimal  solutions  can  be obtained if the algorithm succeeds, (ii) valuable information  on  upper/lower  bounds  on  the  optimal solution are obtained even if the algorithm is stopped before completion (IP methods can become approximate if we define a criterion of stopping them before solving the problem), and (iii) IP methods allow to  provably  prune  parts  of  the  search  space  in  which optimal solutions cannot be located. A more practical advantage of IP methods is that research code such as Minto [3] or GLPK [4], or powerful, general-purpose commercial tools such as CPLEX [5] or Xpress-MP [6] are available. However, despite the known successes, exact methods have a number of disadvantages. Firstly, for  many  problems  the  size  of  the  instances  that  are practically  solvable  is  rather  limited  and,  even  if  an application is feasible, the variance of the computation times is typically very large when applied to different instances of a same  size.  Secondly,  the  memory consumption of exact algorithms can be very large and

lead  to  the  early  abortion  of  a  program.  Thirdly,  for many COPs the best performing algorithms are problem specific and they require large development times by experts in integer programming. Finally, high performing exact algorithms for one problem are often difficult  to  extend  if  some  details  of  the  problem formulation  change.  The  state-of-the  art  for  exact algorithms  is  that  for  some  NP-hard  problems  very large  instances  can  be  solved  fast,  while  for  other problems even small size instances are out of reach.

SLS is probably the most successful class of approximate algorithms. When applied to hard COPs, local search yields high-quality solutions by iteratively applying small modifications (local moves) to a solution in the hope of finding a better one. Embedded into  higher-level  guidance  mechanisms,  which  are called  (general-purpose)  SLS  methods  [2]  or,  more commonly,  metaheuristics,  this  approach  has  been shown to be very successful in achieving near-optimal (and often optimal) solutions to a number of difficult problems[2]  [7].  Examples  of  well-known  generalpurpose SLS methods (or metaheuristics) are simulated annealing, tabu search, memetic algorithms, ant colony optimization or iterated local search[8]. Advantages of SLS algorithms are that (i) they are the best performing algorithms available for a variety of problems, (ii) they can  examine  a  huge  number  of  possible  solutions  in short computation time, (iii) they are often more easily adapted to slight variants of problems and are therefore more  flexible,  and  (iv)  they  are  typically  easier  to understand  and  implement  by  the  common  user  than exact methods. However, local search based algorithms have several disadvantages. Firstly, they cannot prove optimality  and  typically  do  not  give  bounds  on  the quality  of  the  solutions  they  return.  Secondly,  they typically  cannot  provably  reduce  the  search  space. Thirdly, they do not have well defined stopping criteria (this  is  particularly  true  for  metaheuristics).  Finally, local search methods often have problems with highly constrained problems  where  feasible areas of the solution space are disconnected. Another problem that occurs in practice is that, with very few exceptions [9], there  are  no  efficient  general-purpose  local  search solvers  available.  Hence,  although  one  can  typically develop an SLS algorithms of reasonable performance rather  quickly,  many  applications  of  SLS  algorithms can require considerable development and implementation  efforts  if  very  high  performance  is required.

It should be clear by now that IP and SLS approaches have their particular advantages and disadvantages and can be seen as complementary. Therefore, it appears to be  a  good  idea  to  try  to  combine  these  two  distinct techniques into more powerful algorithms.

When considering optimization approaches that combine aspects from metaheuristics with mathematical  programming  techniques,  the  resulting hybrid system may either be of exact or heuristic nature. Exact approaches are guaranteed to yield proven optimal solutions when they are given enough computation  time.  In  contrast,  heuristics  only  aim  at finding reasonably good approximate solutions usually in a more restricted time; performance guarantees are typically  not  provided.  Most  of  the  existing  hybrid approaches  are  of  heuristic  nature,  and  mathematical programming techniques are used to boost the performance of a metaheuristic. Exploiting solutions to exactly solvable relaxations of the original problem, or searching large neighborhoods by means of mathematical  programming  techniques  are  examples for such approaches.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  also several  highly successful ways to exploit metaheuristic strategies for enhancing the performance of mathematical programming  techniques,  and  often  these  methods retain their exactness.

In the first section, we will continue with a structural classifications of strategies for combining metaheuristics and exact optimization techniques. In the second section, we discuss the matheuristic approaches for the routing problems. The last section is devoted for general discussion and conclusion.

## STRUCTURAL MODELS FOR COMBINING METAHEURISTICS WITH EXACT APPROACHES

The  available  techniques  for  COPs  can  roughly  be classified into two main categories: exact and heuristic methods.  Exact  algorithms  are  guaranteed  to  find  an optimal solution and to prove its optimality for every instance  of  a  COP.  The  run-time,  however,  often increases dramatically with the instance size, and often

only small or moderately-sized instances can be practically solved to provable optimality. In this case, the  only  possibility  for  larger  instances  is  to  trade optimality for run-time, yielding heuristic algorithms. In other words,  the guarantee of finding optimal solutions  is  sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  getting  good solutions in a limited time. Two independent heterogeneous  streams,  coming  from  very  different scientific communities, had significant success in solving COPs:

-  Integer  Programming  (IP)  as  an  exact  approach, coming from the  operations  research  community  and based  on  the  concepts  of  linear  programming[10]. Among  the exact methods are branch-and-bound (B&amp;B), dynamic programming, Lagrangian relaxation based  methods,  and  linear  and  integer  programmingbased  methods,  such  as  branch-and-cut,  branch-andprice, and branch-and-cut and-price [11].

-Local search with various extensions and independently  developed  variants,  in  the  following called metaheuristics, as a heuristic approach. Metaheuristics include, among others, simulated annealing [12], tabu search [13], iterated local search [14],  variable  neighborhood  search  [15],  and  various population-based models such as evolutionary algorithms [16], scatter search [17], memetic algorithms [18], and various estimation of distribution algorithms [19].

In [20] authors present a more general classification of existing approaches combining exact and metaheuristic algorithms for combinatorial optimization in which the following two main categories are distinguished:

-Collaborative  Combinations :  By  collaboration  it means  that  the  algorithms  exchange  information,  but are not part of each other. Exact and heuristic algorithms may be executed sequentially, intertwined or in parallel.

-Integrative  Combinations :  By  integration  it  means that one technique is a subordinate embedded component  of  another  technique.  Thus,  there  is  a distinguished master algorithm, which can be either an exact  or  a  metaheuristic  algorithm,  and  at  least  one integrated slave.

[21] present a similar classification of hybrid algorithms, further including constraint programming. The authors discern a decomposition scheme corresponding  to  the  integrative  combinations  and  a multiple search scheme corresponding to collaborative combinations.

In another classification, [22] classifies heuristics approaches to 4 category and then tried to show how we can use mathematical programming in each.

-Construction  heuristics :  start  from  ''scratch''  and proceed through a set of steps, each of which adds a component to the solution  until  a  complete  (feasible) solution  is  generated.  We  also  label  such  methods decomposition approaches since they effectively decompose a larger problem into a series of sequentially executed sub problems.

-Improvement heuristics : start with a feasible solution and iteratively  execute  solution  improving  steps  until some termination condition is met.

-Relaxation-based heuristics : It is very often the case that  while  a  problem  may  be  very  difficult,  a  certain relaxation to that problem may be efficiently solvable. The solution to a relaxation generates a bound on the value of a problem's optimal solution. As such relaxations are often employed in exact mathematical programming approaches. Additionally, they can often serve  as  a  basis  for  effective  heuristics.  Two  general approaches are used. In one, the solution to a relaxation is  modified  to  generate  a  feasible  solution  to  the problem of interest. Probably the prototypical approach of this type involves rounding of the solution to a linear programming  relaxation  of  an  integer  program.  The second class of relaxation based approaches makes use of the dual information provided by the solution to the relaxation in a subsequently executing heuristic.

-Using  mathematical  programming  algorithms  to generate approximate solutions : An exact optimization algorithm  terminates  with  an  optimal  solution  and  a proof of optimality. In many cases, a significant portion of the total solution time is spent proving that a solution found (quickly) is optimal. Another common scenario is that a large amount of computing time is spent going from a ''near optimal'' solution to an optimal one. With this motivation, in many  practical settings, exact mathematical programming algorithms are modified to

generate  a  very  good,  but  not  necessarily  optimal, solutions. Approaches of this class are based on the idea of solving the mathematical programming formulation in a 'relaxed' way, i.e., by relaxing some attributes of the exact solution approach that increase solution time significantly. Methodologies that fall in this class are, for example, the premature stopping of a branch-andbound algorithm, heuristic variable fixing, and rounding of the relaxed solution. Also, the branch-andprice/column  generation-based  approaches  belong  to this class.

The other survey on matheuristics is the one done by [23]. The proposed classification is different from the one adopted in [22]. The following classes are introduced:

1. set-covering/partitioning-based approaches , corresponding to the class of branch and- price/column generation-based approaches;
2. Local  branching  approaches ,  based  on  the  local branching scheme proposed in [24].
3. Decomposition approaches , which coincides with the first class defined in [22].

## MATHEURISTICS FOR VEHICLE ROUTING PROBLEM: A REVIEW

- [25] classify matheuristics for vehicle routing problems into three classes, which we state verbatim:
1. Decomposition approaches . In general, in a decomposition  approach  the  problem  is  divided  into smaller and simpler sub-problems and a specific solution  method  is  applied  to  each  sub-problem.  In matheuristics,  some  or  all  these  sub-problems  are solved through mathematical programming models to optimality or sub-optimality.
2. Improvement heuristics .  Matheuristics belonging to this  class  use  mathematical  programming  models  to improve  a  solution  found  by  a  different  heuristic approach. They are very common as they can be applied whatever heuristic is used to obtain a solution that the mathematical programming model aims at improving.
3. Branch-and-price/column generation-based approaches .  Branch-and-price  algorithms  have  been widely and successfully used for the solution of routing problems. Such algorithms make use of a set

partitioning  formulation,  where  a  binary  or  integer variable is associated with each possible route (column). Due to the exponential number of variables, the solution of the linear relaxation of the formulation is performed through column generation. In the branchand-price/column  generation-based  matheuristics  the exact method is modified to speed up the convergence, thus losing the  guarantee of optimality. For example, the column generation phase is stopped prematurely. The following three sections are devoted to the description of these three classes.

## I. Decomposition Approaches

Traditionally, heuristic methods, and metaheuristics in particular,  have  been  primal-only  methods.  They  are usually  quite  effective  in  solving  the  given  problem instances, and they terminate providing the best feasible solution  found  during  the  allotted  computation  time. However, disregarding dual information implies some obvious drawbacks, first of all not knowing the quality of the proposed solution, but also having possibly found an optimal solution at the beginning of the search and having wasted CPU time ever since, having searched a big search space that could have been much reduced, or having  disregarded  important  information  that  could have been very effective for constructing good solutions.  Dual  information  is  also  tightly  connected with  the  possibility  of  obtaining  good  lower  bounds (making reference, here and forward, to minimization problems),  another  element  which  is  not  a  structural part  of  current  metaheuristics.  On  the  contrary,  most mathematical programming literature dedicated to exact methods is strongly based on these elements for achieving the obtained results. There is nothing, though, that limits the effectiveness of dual/bounding procedures  to  exact  methods.  There  are  in  fact  wide research possibilities both in determining how  to convert originally exact methods into efficient heuristics and in designing new, intrinsically heuristic techniques, which include dual information.

There are many ways in which bounds can be derived, one  of  the  most  effective  of  these  is  the  use  of decomposition techniques [25], [26]. These are techniques primarily meant to exploit the possibility of identifying a sub-problem in the problem to solve and to decompose the whole problem in a master problem

and  a  sub-problem,  which  communicate  via  dual  or dual-related information. The sub-problems are handled and solved independently. Finally, a feasible solution for the original problem is obtained from the solutions to the sub-problems. In matheuristics, one or all the subproblems  are  solved  through  the  exact  solution  of  a mathematical  programming  formulation. There  are three basic  decomposition  techniques: Lagrangean relaxation , Dantzig- Wolfe decomposition , and Benders decomposition. The  popularity  of  these  techniques derives  both  from  their  effectiveness  in  providing efficient  bounds  and  from  the  observation  that  many real-world problems lead themselves to a decomposition.

Unfortunately, despite their prolonged presence in the optimization literature, there is as yet no clear-cut recipe for determining which problems should be solved with decompositions and which are better solved  by  other means. Clearly, decomposition techniques are foremost candidates for problems which are inherently structured as a master and different sub-problems, but it is at times possible to effectively decompose the formulation of a problem which does not show such structure and enjoy advantages.  Examples from the  literature  of  effective usage of decomposition techniques (mainly Lagrangean) on single-structure problems include, e.g., set covering [27], [28],[29] set partitioning [30], [31], [32],[33] and crew scheduling [34], [35], [36], [37][38]. This is also the case for the vehicle routing problems (VRPs),  the  inventory  routing  problems  (IRPs),  the production  routing  problems  (PRPs)  and  the  location routing problems (LRPs). Different matheuristics have been  proposed  for  the  solution  of  these  problems belonging  to  the  class  of  decomposition  approaches. Routing problems typically involve the following two basic decisions (in addition to further decisions related to the particular application): the clustering of customers which are assigned to each vehicle and the sequencing of customers in vehicle routes. This feature makes it natural the use of a decomposition approach of the  kind  cluster  first-route  second,  i.e.,  an  approach where first the assignment of customers to vehicles is made  and  then  the  decision  on  how  to  route  the customers assigned to each vehicle is taken.

One of the most used approaches for routing problem is cluster first-route second approach. [39],[40]

## · Cluster first-route second approaches

The basic idea of the cluster first-route second approaches  is  to  divide  the  two  main  decisions  that characterize  routing  problems,  i.e.,  the  assignment  of customers  to vehicles and the sequencing  of the customers  visited  by  each  route.  Cluster  first-route second is one of the first heuristic approaches proposed for the solution of the classical VRP. In the VRP, we are given a set of customers with an associated demand and a fleet of capacitated vehicles. The problem is to find a set of vehicle routes serving these customers such that the demands are satisfied, each customer is visited only once and the vehicle capacity is never exceeded.

A  matheuristic  based  on  a  cluster  first-route  second approach to solve the VRP is motivated by the fact that the clustering of customers can be handled through the solution  of  a  MILP.  The  routing  of  customers  inside each  route  can  instead  be  managed  by  adopting  any heuristic  available  for  the  solution  of  the  Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP).

The  first  authors  who  proposed  a  cluster  first-route second matheuristic for a routing problem, and specifically for the VRP, are [36]. In the first phase of the  algorithm  so-called  seed  customers  are  chosen heuristically, and an assignment problem is solved to optimality to assign the remaining customers to the seed customers. Each seed customer identifies a cluster of customers. Then, routes are built by solving a TSP on each cluster.  This  approach  can  be  applied  to  a  wide variety of routing problems. The scheme has later been extended to solve the VRPTW in [37]. [38]propose a decomposition approach for the VRP which is similar to the one proposed in [36]. The algorithm is based on the formulation of the routing problem as a capacitated concentrator location problem (CCLP). The idea is to identify seed points, to estimate the cost of assigning each customer to each seed point and then solve a CCLP to  determine  the  clustering  of  customers.  Once  the clusters are obtained, a TSP is solved on each cluster. The authors apply the algorithm to the VRP showing that the heuristic performs well on both problems and often outperforms previous heuristics proposed in the

literature.  A  similar  approach  is  applied  by  the  same authors to the VRPTW in [41],[42]

## II. Improvement Heuristics

Matheuristics  belonging  to  the  class  of  improvement heuristics combine a heuristic with the exact solution of a  MILP  model  that  aims  at  improving  the  solution obtained  by  applying  the  heuristic.  Different  ways  to combine the heuristic procedure and the solution of a MILP model have been developed. This combination can  go  two-ways,  either  using  MILP  to  improve  or design metaheuristics or using metaheuristics for improving known MILP techniques, even though the first of these two directions is by far more studied.

When using MILP embedded into metaheuristics, the main possibility appears to be improving local search [44],[45].  A  seminal  work  in  this  direction  is  local branching  [46],[47],  where  MILP  is  used  to  define  a suitable  neighborhood  to  be  explored  exactly  by  a MILP solver.  Essentially,  only  a  number  of  decision variables is left free and the neighborhood is composed by all possible value combination of these free variables.

The idea of an exact exploration of a possibly exponential size neighborhood is at the heart of several other  approaches.  One  of  the  best  known  is  possibly Very  Large  Neighborhood  Search (VLNS)  [48],[49]. This method can be applied when it is possible to define the neighborhood exploration as a combinatorial optimization  problem  itself.  In  this  case  it  could  be possible to solve it efficiently, and it becomes possible the  full  exploration  of  exponential  neighborhoods. Complementary  to  this  last  is  the corridor method [50],[51],  [52]  where  a  would-be  large  exponential neighborhood  is  kept  of  manageable  size  by  adding exogenous  constraint  to  the  problem  formulation,  so that the feasible region is reduced to a 'corridor' around the current solution.

Several other methods build around the idea of solving via MILP the neighborhood exploration problem, they differ  in  the  way  the  neighborhood  is  defined.  For example,  an  unconventional  way  of  defining  it  is proposed in the ' dynasearch ' method [53],[54], where the  neighborhood  is  defined  by  the  series  of  moves which can be performed at each iteration, and dynamic programming is used to find the best sequence of simple moves to use at each iteration.

However,  MILP  contributed  to  metaheuristics  also along two other opposite lines: improving the effectiveness  of  well-established  metaheuristics  and providing the structural basis for designing new metaheuristics. As for the first line, MILP hybrids are reported  for  most  known metaheuristics: tabu search, variable neighborhood search, ant colony optimization, simulated annealing, genetic algorithms, scatter search, etc. Particularly appealing appear to be genetic algorithms, for which a number of different proposals were  published,  with  special  reference  to  how  to optimize the crossover operator. As for the second line, the proposals are different, but they still have to settle and  show  how  they  compare  on  a  broader  range  of problems, other than those for which they were originally  presented.  One  example  is  the  so-called Forward  and  Backward  (F&amp;B) approach  [55],  [56] which implements a memory-based look ahead strategy based on the past search history. The method iterates a partial exploration of the solution space by generating a sequence  of  enumerative  trees  of  two  types,  called forward and backward trees, such that a partial solution of the forward tree has a bound on its completion cost derived from partial solutions of the backward tree, and vice-versa.

## III. Branch and price/column generation-based approaches

Also,  Branch-and-price/column  generation  algorithms are usually adopted to solve set partitioning formulations.  Branch-and-price  algorithms  have  been proved to be successful for the exact solution of a wide variety of routing problems, including some of the most famous and classical ones, like the VRP and VRPTW, and are at the moment the exact leading methodology. While  the  branch-and-price  scheme  is  a  successful exact method and column generation is a building block of  it,  their  use  has  been  extended  to  obtain  high performing and efficient heuristic algorithms. We call these  heuristic  approaches  branch-and  price/  column generation-based approaches. They have the common characteristic of using branch-and-price and/or column generation to build heuristic solutions. However, numerous schemes have been proposed in the literature

which  differ  in  terms  of  how  columns  are  generated and/or of how they are used to obtain a feasible solution. [57],[58] classified this approach as 4 classes: restricted master heuristics , heuristic branching approaches and relaxation-based approaches.

## · restricted master heuristics

One of the most used schemes in the class of branchand-price/column generation based approaches is called restricted  master  heuristic.  This  scheme  is  typically embedded in a branch-and-price approach where the set partitioning formulation  is solved on  a subset of columns  generated  by  the  solution  of  the  pricing problem, thus obtaining a feasible solution quickly. The restricted master heuristic is widely used in branch andprice approaches as it enables a quick improvement of bounds  and  thus  a  speed  up  of  the  exact  solution procedure. Also, the can be used as heuristic algorithms to generate the columns. The column generation phase may  be  performed  in  two  different  ways:  either  a heuristic is used which does not take into account the dual information given by the solution of the restricted master problem, or the column generation algorithm is based on the dual information, but only a restricted set of columns is generated. Most of the approaches belong to  the  first  class.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  these approaches  are  much  easier  to  implement  as  they simply require a heuristic scheme to generate columns and  the  set  partitioning  model.  We  first  analyze  the approaches based on heuristic column generation and then  describe  those  based  on  the  use  of  the  dual information provided by the master problem.

## · heuristic branching approaches

Heuristic  branching  approaches  are  branch-and-price algorithms where, in order to speed up the convergence of the solution method, branching is performed heuristically with the aim of pruning a large number of nodes of the branch-and-bound tree and thus obtaining a good solution quickly.

In column generation approaches and branch-and-price algorithms,  it  is  important  to  have  fast  algorithms available for repeatedly solving the pricing subproblem,  i.e.  identifying  a  variable  (column)  with negative  reduced  costs.  For  many  hard  problems, however, this sub-problem is also hard. Fast heuristics are  therefore  sometimes  used  for  approaching  the pricing problem. Note that it is fine when pricing in a column with negative reduced costs even when it is not one with minimum reduced costs. However, at the end of column generation it is necessary to  prove that no further column with negative reduced costs exists, i.e. the  pricing  problem  must  finally  be  solved  exactly. Otherwise, no quality guarantees can be given for the final  solution  of  the  whole  column  generation  or branch-and-price algorithm, and they must be considered to be heuristic methods only. Most heuristic approaches for solving pricing problems are relatively simple construction methods. More sophisticated metaheuristics have so far been used less frequently.

Also, almost any effective B&amp;B approach depends on some heuristic for deriving a promising initial solution, whose objective value is used as original upper bound. Furthermore, and as already mentioned, heuristics are typically also applied to some or all sub-problems of the B&amp;B tree in order to eventually obtain new incumbent solutions and corresponding improved upper bounds. In order to keep the B&amp;B tree relatively small, good upper bounds are of crucial interest. Therefore, metaheuristics are  often  also  applied  for  these  purposes.  However, when performing a relatively expensive metaheuristic at each node of a large B&amp;B tree in a straight-forward, independent  way,  the  additional  computational  effort often does not pay off. Different calls of the metaheuristic  might  perform  more  or  less  redundant searches in similar areas of the whole search space. A careful selection of the B&amp;B tree nodes for which the metaheuristic is performed and how much effort is put into each call is therefore crucial. As an example, [59], [60]  describes  a  chunking-based  selection  strategy  to decide  at  each  node  of  the  B&amp;B  tree  whether  or  not reactive  tabu  search  is  called.  The  chunking-based strategy measures a distance between the current node and  nodes  already  explored  by  the  metaheuristic  in order to bias the selection toward  distant points. Reported computational results indicate that adding the metaheuristic improves the B&amp;B performance.

## · relaxation-based approaches

An  optimal  solution  for  a  relaxation  of  the  original problem often indicates in which areas of the original

problem's search space good or even optimal solutions might lie. Solutions to relaxations are therefore frequently exploited in (meta-) heuristics.

Sometimes an optimal solution to a relaxation can be repaired  by  a  problem  specific  procedure  in  order  to make it feasible for the original problem and to use it as promising starting point for a subsequent metaheuristic (or exact) search. Often, the linear programming (LP) relaxation is used for this purpose, and only a simple rounding scheme is needed. For example, [46] combine interior  point  methods  and  metaheuristics  for  solving the  multidimensional  knapsack  problem  (MKP).  In  a first  step  an  interior  point  method  is  performed  with early  termination.  By  rounding  and  applying  several different  ascent  heuristics,  a  population  of  different feasible  candidate  solutions  is  generated.  This  set  of solutions is then used as initial population for a pathrelinking/scatter search. Obtained results show that the presented combination is a promising research direction.

Beside initialization, optima of LP relaxations are often exploited for guiding local improvement or the repairing of infeasible candidate solutions. For example, in [61] the MKP is considered, and variables are sorted according to increasing LP-values. A greedy repair  procedure  considers  the  variables  in  this  order and removes items from the knapsack until all constraints  are  fulfilled.  In  a  greedy  improvement procedure,  items  are  considered  in  reverse  order  and included  in  the  knapsack  as  long  as  no  constraint  is violated.

Another possibility of exploiting the optimal solution of an LP relaxation is more direct and restrictive: Some of the decision variables having integral values in the LPoptimum are fixed to these values, and the subsequent optimization  only  considers  the  remaining  variables. Such approaches are sometimes also referred to as core methods, since the original problem is reduced and only its  'hard  core'  is  further  processed.  Obviously,  the selection of the variables in the core is critical. Another example for exploiting the LP relaxation within metaheuristics is the hybrid tabu search algorithm from [48]. Here, the search space is reduced and partitioned via  additional  constraints  fixing  the  total  number  of items  to  be  packed.  Bounds  for  these  constraints  are calculated by solving modified LP relaxations. For each remaining  part  of  the  search  space,  tabu  search  is independently applied, starting with a solution derived from  the  LP  relaxation  of  the  partial  problem.  The approach has further been improved in [49] by additional variable fixing.

Also  other  relaxations  besides  the  LP  relaxation  are occasionally successfully exploited in conjunction with metaheuristics. The principal techniques for such combinations are similar.

The relaxation-based approaches are characterized by the  fact  that  a  feasible  solution  to  the  problem  is generated from the information provided by the optimal solution of a relaxation of the master problem. Column generation  is  used  to  solve  the  relaxation.  Once  the relaxed  solution  is  obtained,  a  heuristic  procedure  is used to generate a feasible solution to the problem.

Overall, Branch-and-price/column generation-based matheuristics  are  becoming  more  and  more  popular. This is due to the success of branch-and-price algorithms developed for the exact solution of routing problems.  The  scientific  community  has  developed  a deep knowledge of column generation approaches, and this  knowledge  is  nowadays  transferred  also  to  the development of heuristic schemes. A further advantage of branch-and-price/column generation-based approaches is that they are flexible and easily adaptable to different problem characteristics. Most of the algorithms  adopt  the  idea  of  using  a  set  partitioning formulation  and  rely  on  heuristic  schemes  for  the generation of columns.

## GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We have surveyed a multitude of examples where more powerful  optimization  systems  were  constructed  by combining mathematical programming techniques and metaheuristics. Many very different ways exist for such hybridizations, and we have classified them into several major methodological categories and also we brought some  examples  of  using  them  in  vehicle  routing problem. The probably most traditional approach is to use some  metaheuristic  for providing  high-quality incumbents and bounds to a B&amp;B-based exact method. On  the  other  hand,  quickly  solved  relaxations  or  the primal-dual relationship are often used for guiding or narrowing  the  search  in  metaheuristics.  A  relatively

new and highly promising stream are those methods in which B&amp;B is modified in some way in order to follow the  spirit  of  local  search  based  metaheuristics.  A nowadays frequently and successfully applied approach is large neighborhood search by means of ILP techniques. When  extending  this concept towards searching the neighborhood defined by the common and disjoint properties of two or more parental solutions, we come  to  solution  merging  approaches.  Furthermore highly  promising  hybrid  approaches  are  those  where metaheuristics are utilized within more complex branch-and-cut and branch and- price algorithms for cut separation  and  column  generation,  respectively.  As noted,  some  approaches  from  the  literature  can  be considered  to  fall  into  several  of  the  methodological categories we  have  identified. Although  a lot of experience already exists with such hybrid systems, it is usually  still  a  tough  question  which  algorithms  and kinds  of  combinations  are  most  promising  for  a  new problem at hand.

## REFERENCES:

- [1] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, 'Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness (Series of Books in the Mathematical Sciences),' Comput. Intractability , p. 340, 1979.
- [2] H. H. Hoos and T. Stützle, 'Stochastic Local Search: Foundations and Applications,' Stoch. Local Search Found. Appl. , vol. 3777, pp. 126-169, 2004.
- [3] G. L. Nemhauser, M. W. P. Savelsbergh, and G. C. Sigismondi, 'MINTO, a mixed INTeger optimizer,' Oper. Res. Lett. , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 47-58, 1994.
- [4] E. Oki, 'GLPK (GNU Linear Programming Kit),' in Linear Programming and Algorithms for Communication Networks - A Practical Guide to Network Design, Control, and Management , 2012, pp. 1-34.
- [5] R. Subhaa and N. Jawahar, 'ILOG CPLEX OPL modelling for machine cell formation,' Int. J. Eng. Technol. , vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3734-3741, 2013.
- [6] R. Laundy, M. Perregaard, G. Tavares, H. Tipi, and A. Vazacopoulos, 'Solving hard mixed-integer programming problems with xpress-MP: A MIPLIB 2003 case study,' INFORMS J. Comput. , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 304-313, 2009.
- [7] P. Toth and D. Vigo, The vehicle routing problem , vol. 9. 2002.
- [8] F. Glover and G. A. Kochenberger, Handbook of metaheuristics . Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.
- [9] L. Michel, A. See, P. Van Hentenryck, and L. Michel, Constraint-Based Local Search . 2005.
- [10] G. B. Dantzig, 'Linear Programming and Extensions,' 1963.
- [11] G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, Integer and combinatorial

optimization . Wiley, 1999.

- [12] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, 'Optimization by simulated annealing.,' Science , vol. 220, no. 4598, pp. 671-80, 1983.
- [13] F. Glover and M. Laguna, 'Tabu Search,' J. Comput. Biol. a J. Comput. Mol. cell Biol. , vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 1689-703, 1997.
- [14] H. R. Lourenco, O. C. Martin, and T. Stutzle, 'Iterated Local Search,' Int. Ser. Oper. Res. Manag. Sci. , pp. 321-354, 2003.
- [15] P. Hansen and N. Mladenović, 'An Introduction to Variable Neighborhood Search,' Meta-Heuristics , pp. 433-458, 1999.
- [16] T. Bäck, D. B. Fogel, and Z. Michalewicz, 'Handbook of Evolutionary Computation,' Evol. Comput. , vol. 2, pp. 1-11, 1997.
- [17] F. Glover, M. Laguna, and R. Martí, 'Fundamentals of scatter search and path relinking,' Control Cybern. , vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 652-684, 2000.
- [18] P. Moscato and C. Cotta, 'A Gentle Introduction to Memetic Algorithms,' in Handbook of Metaheuristics , Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003, pp. 105-144.
- [19] P. Larrañaga and J. A. Lozano, Estimation of Distribution Algorithms: A New Tool for Evolutionary Computation , vol. 2. 2002.
- [20] J. Puchinger and G. R. Raidl, 'Combining Metaheuristics and Exact Algorithms in Combinatorial Optimization: A Survey and Classification,' Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 41-53.
- [21] E. Danna and C. Le Pape, 'Two generic schemes for efficient and robust cooperative algorithms,' Oper. Res. Comput. Sci. Interfaces Ser. , vol. 27, pp. 33-57, 2004.
- [22] M. O. Ball, 'Heuristics based on mathematical programming,' Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science , vol. 16, no. 1. pp. 21-38, 2011.
- [23] K. F. Doerner and V. Schmid, 'Survey: Matheuristics for rich vehicle routing problems,' in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) , 2010, vol. 6373 LNCS, pp. 206-221.
- [24] M. Fischetti and A. Lodi, 'Local branching,' in Mathematical Programming , 2003, vol. 98, no. 1-3, pp. 23-47.
- [25] C. Archetti and M. G. Speranza, 'A survey on matheuristics for routing problems,' EURO J. Comput. Optim. , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 223-246, 2014.
- [26] S. H. Bazaraa MS, Jarvis JJ, Linear Programming and Network Flows , no. 1. 2014.
- [27] Fakhravar, H. (2020). Application of Failure Modes and Effects Analysis in the Engineering Design..
- [28] a. Caprara, M. Fischetti, and P. Toth, 'A Heuristic Method for the Set Covering Problem,' Oper. Res. , vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 730743, 1999.
- [29] S. Ceria, P. Nobili, and A. Sassano, 'A Lagrangian-based heuristic for large-scale set covering problems,' Math. Program. , vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 215-228, 1998.
- [30] a. Atamtrk, G. L. Nemhauser, and M. W. P. Savelsbergh, 'A combined Lagrangian, linear programming, and implication heuristic for large-scale set partitioning problems,' J. Heuristics , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 247-259, 1996.
- [31] Tahami, H., Mirzazadeh, A., Arshadi-khamseh, A., &amp; GholamiQadikolaei, A. (2016). A periodic review integrated inventory model for buyer's unidentified protection interval demand distribution. Cogent Engineering, 3(1), 1206689.

- [32] M. A. Boschetti, A. Mingozzi, and S. Ricciardelli, 'A dual ascent procedure for the set partitioning problem,' Discret. Optim. , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 735-747, 2008
- [33] M. G. C. van Krieken, H. A. Fleuren, and M. J. P. Peeters, 'A Lagrangean Relaxtion Based Algorithm for Solving Set Partitioning Problems,' Discuss. Pap. , 2004.
- [34] M. A. Boschetti, A. Mingozzi, and S. Ricciardelli, 'An Exact Algorithm for the Simplified Multiple Depot Crew Scheduling Problem,' Ann. Oper. Res. , vol. 127, pp. 177-201, 2004.
- [35] Tahami, H., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2020). A fuzzy inventory model considering imperfect quality items with receiving reparative batch and order. European Journal of Engineering and Technology Research, 5(10), 1179-1185.
- [36] R. Freling, D. Huisman, and A. P. M. Wagelmans, 'Models and algorithms for integration of vehicle and crew scheduling,' in Journal of Scheduling , 2003, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 63-85.
- [37] K. L. Hoffman and M. Padberg, 'Solving Airline Crew Scheduling Problems by Branch-and-Cut,' Manage. Sci. , vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 657-682, 1993.
- [38] A. Mingozzi, M. A. Boschetti, S. Ricciardelli, and L. Bianco, 'A Set Partitioning Approach to the Crew Scheduling Problem,' Oper. Res. , vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 873-888, 1999.
- [39] Tahami, H., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2020). Multilevel Reorder Strategy-based Supply Chain Model. In 5th North American Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management (IEOM), Michigan, USA
- [40] M. L. Fisher and R. Jaikumar, 'A generalized assignment heuristic for vehicle routing,' Networks , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 109124, 1981.
- [41] Y. a. Koskosidis, W. B. Powell, and M. M. Solomon, 'An Optimization-Based Heuristic for Vehicle Routing and Scheduling with Soft Time Window Constraints,' Transp. Sci. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 69-85, 1992.
- [42] Fakhravar, H &amp; Tahami, H. (2021). SYSTEMS STATISTICAL ENGINEERING-HIERARCHICAL FUZZY CONSTRAINT PROPAGATION.
- [43] J. Bramel and D. Simchi-Levi, 'A Location Based Heuristic for General Routing Problems,' Oper. Res. , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 649660, 1995.
- [44] Tahami, H., Rabadi, G., &amp; Haouari, M. (2020). Exact approaches for routing capacitated electric vehicles. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 144, 102126.J. Bramel and D. Simchi-Levi, 'A Location Based Heuristic for General Routing Problems,' Oper. Res. , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 649660, 1995.
- [45] J. Bramel and D. Simchi-Levi, 'Probabilistic Analyses and Practical Algorithms for the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows,' Oper. Res. , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 501-509, 1996.
- [46] Fakhravar, H. (2020). Quantifying uncertainty in risk assessment using fuzzy theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09334.
- [47] Fakhravar, H. (2021). Application of Failure Modes and Effects Analysis in the Engineering Design Process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05444.
- [48] I. Dumitrescu and T. Stützle, 'Usage of exact algorithms to enhance stochastic local search algorithms,' Matheuristics , pp. 103-134, 2010.
- [49] Ouabira, M. M., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2021). Effective Project Management and the Role of Quality Assurance throughout the Project Life Cycle. European Journal of Engineering and

Technology Research, 6(5)..

- [50] R. K. Ahuja, Ö. Ergun, J. B. Orlin, and A. P. Punnen, 'A survey of very large-scale neighborhood search techniques,' Discrete Applied Mathematics , vol. 123, no. 1-3. pp. 75-102, 2002.
- [51] M. Sniedovich and S. Vo??, 'The corridor method: A dynamic programming inspired metaheuristic,' in Control and Cybernetics , 2006, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 551-578.
- [52] R. K. Congram, C. N. Potts, and S. L. van de Velde, 'An Iterated Dynasearch Algorithm for the Single-Machine Total Weighted Tardiness Scheduling Problem,' INFORMS J. Comput. , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 52-67, 2002.
- [53] E. Bartolini and A. Mingozzi, 'Algorithms for the non-bifurcated network design problem,' J. Heuristics , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 259281, 2009.
- [54] Yahoodik, S., Tahami, H., Unverricht, J., Yamani, Y., Handley, H., &amp; Thompson, D. (2020, December). Blink Rate as a Measure of Driver Workload during Simulated Driving. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 64, No. 1, pp. 1825-1828). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.
- [55] D. L. Woodruff, 'A Chunking Based Selection Strategy for Integrating Meta-Heuristics with Branch and Bound,' in MetaHeuristics: Advances and Trends in Local Search Paradigms for Optimization , Boston, MA: Springer US, 1999, pp. 499-511.
- [56] Tahami, H., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2020). A fuzzy inventory model considering imperfect quality items with receiving reparative batch and order overlapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.05881D. L. Woodruff, 'A Chunking Based Selection Strategy for Integrating Meta-Heuristics with Branch and Bound,' in MetaHeuristics: Advances and Trends in Local Search Paradigms for Optimization , Boston, MA: Springer US, 1999, pp. 499-511.
- [57] A. Plateau, D. Tachat, and P. Tolla, 'A hybrid search combining interior point methods and metaheuristics for 0-1 programming,' Int. Trans. Oper. Res. , vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 731-746, 2002.
- [58] G. R. Raidl, 'An improved genetic algorithm for the multiconstrained 0-1 knapsack\nproblem,' 1998 IEEE Int. Conf. Evol. Comput. Proceedings. IEEE World Congr. Comput. Intell. (Cat. No.98TH8360) , pp. 0-4, 1998.
- [59] M. Vasquez and J. K. Hao, 'A hybrid approach for the 0-1 multidimensional knapsack problem,' in IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2001, pp. 328-333.
- [60] M. Vasquez and Y. Vimont, 'Improved results on the 0-1 multidimensional knapsack problem,' Eur. J. Oper. Res. , vol. 165, no. 1, pp. 70-81, 2005.
- [61] Tahami, H., Mirzazadeh, A., &amp; Gholami-Qadikolaei, A. (2019). Simultaneous control on lead time elements and ordering cost for an inflationary inventory-production model with mixture of normal distributions LTD under finite capacity. RAIROOperations Research, 53(4), 1357-1384.
